[DBM] ClickHouse: document query errors, explain plans, query tagging, parts & merges, schema collection, CPU time (#37409)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/database_monitoring/setup_clickhouse/cloud.md

**Query metrics**
: Aggregated performance metrics for executed queries, enabling analysis of query behavior and trends over time. Collected from `system.query_log`. Starting with Agent 7.82, includes CPU time fields (`total_cpu_virtual_time_us`, `total_cpu_wait_us`) that distinguish CPU-bound queries from I/O-bound ones.

**Query samples**
: Point-in-time snapshots of currently running queries are captured from `system.processes` at a 1-second interval. Because ClickHouse queries often complete in under one second, short-lived queries may not always appear in samples.

**Query completions**
: Records of individual completed query executions, capturing all successfully executed queries. Use query completions alongside query samples to ensure complete visibility into all query activity, including short-lived queries not observed during sampling. Starting with Agent 7.82, each completion record includes per-query CPU fields (`cpu_virtual_time_us`, `cpu_wait_us`).

**Query errors** (Agent 7.79+)

> : Records of failed query executions — queries that raised an exception before starting (`ExceptionBeforeStart`) or during processing (`ExceptionWhileProcessing`). Each error record includes the exception message, ClickHouse error code, and stack trace. Enabled by default alongside query completions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Records of failed query executions: queries that raised an exception before starting (`ExceptionBeforeStart`) or during processing (`ExceptionWhileProcessing`). Each error record includes the exception message, ClickHouse error code, and stack trace. Enabled by default alongside query completions.
```

**Explain plans** (Agent 7.79+)
: Logical query execution plans automatically collected for queries observed in query completions. The Agent runs `EXPLAIN json=1` against sampled `SELECT` and `WITH` statements and attaches the obfuscated plan to the corresponding query completion record. Rate-limited to avoid overhead on high-throughput services.

**Query tagging** (Agent 7.79+)
: Tags injected into SQL statements as comments using the [sqlcommenter][sqlcommenter] or [marginalia][marginalia] format are automatically extracted and surfaced in DBM as Propagated Tags on query samples, completions, and explain plans. Using any database API that supports SQL execution, add a comment to your statement:

  ```sql
  /*key='val'*/ SELECT * from FOO
  ```

  Separate multiple tags with commas:

> 

Reviewer: The comma-separated format implies the single-tag form, so we can combine

```suggestion
: Tags injected into SQL statements as comments using the [sqlcommenter][sqlcommenter] or [marginalia][marginalia] format are automatically extracted and surfaced in DBM as Propagated Tags on query samples, completions, and explain plans. Using any database API that supports SQL execution, add a comment to your SQL statement with comma-separated key-value pairs:

```

  ```sql

>   /*key1='val1',key2='val2'*/ SELECT * from FOO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /*key1='val1',key2='val2'*/ SELECT * FROM foo
```

  ```

>   Tags appear on the Sample Details page under **Propagated Tags** and can be used to filter the Explain Plans and Query Samples views. See [Tagging SQL Statements][tag-statements] for full details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Tags appear on the Sample Details page under **Propagated Tags** and can be used to filter the **Explain Plans** and **Query Samples** views. See [Tagging SQL Statements][tag-statements] for full details.
```

> [sqlcommenter]: https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter

Reviewer: Move these three reference definitions to the bottom of the file with the other link refs, and convert to numbered style (`[1]`, `[2]`, `[3]`) instead of named identifiers.

Reviewer: @sangeetashivaji Tagging to make sure this feedback gets addressed!

[marginalia]: https://github.com/basecamp/marginalia
[tag-statements]: /database_monitoring/guide/tag_database_statements/

**Parts and merges** (Agent 7.80+)
: Per-table storage health metrics and a real-time event stream consumed by the DBM Storage Health timeline view. The Agent queries `system.parts`, `system.merges`, `system.mutations`, and `system.replication_queue` on each collection cycle and emits the following gauges:

  | Metric | Description |
  |--------|-------------|
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.active` | Active part count per table |

>   | `clickhouse.table.parts.level_zero` | Level-zero (unflushed) parts — high values indicate merge backpressure |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.level_zero` | Level-zero (unflushed) parts; high values indicate merge backpressure |
```

  | `clickhouse.table.parts.wide` | Wide-format parts per table |
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.rows` | Total rows across active parts |
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.bytes_on_disk` | Compressed bytes on disk |
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.compressed_bytes` | Compressed bytes (storage) |
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.uncompressed_bytes` | Uncompressed bytes (in-memory size) |
  | `clickhouse.table.parts.max_merge_level` | Highest merge level of any active part |
  | `clickhouse.table.detached_parts.count` | Total detached parts per table |
  | `clickhouse.table.detached_parts.corrupted` | Corrupted detached parts |
  | `clickhouse.merges.active` | Active (in-progress) merges per table |
  | `clickhouse.merges.stalled` | Merges running longer than the stall threshold |
  | `clickhouse.mutations.in_progress` | In-progress mutations per table |
  | `clickhouse.mutations.failing` | Mutations with at least one failed attempt |
  | `clickhouse.replication.queue_depth` | Replication queue depth per table |
  | `clickhouse.replication.stuck_tasks` | Replication queue entries with repeated failures |

**Schema collection** (Agent 7.81+)

> : Catalog metadata — databases, tables, views, and columns — collected periodically and surfaced in the DBM Schema Explorer. The Agent queries `system.tables` and `system.columns` (and `system.view_refreshes` for ClickHouse 24.3+) and emits one structured payload per cycle. Disabled by default; enable with `collect_schemas.enabled: true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Catalog metadata (databases, tables, views, and columns) collected periodically and surfaced in the DBM Schema Explorer. The Agent queries `system.tables` and `system.columns` (and `system.view_refreshes` for ClickHouse 24.3+) and emits one structured payload per cycle. Disabled by default; enable with `collect_schemas.enabled: true`.
```

The <code>REMOTE</code> privilege is required because the Agent uses ClickHouse's <code>clusterAllReplicas()</code> table function to aggregate data across all replicas in a ClickHouse Cloud service through the single endpoint. This privilege enables cross-node query execution—it does <strong>not</strong> grant access to any additional databases or tables beyond what was explicitly granted above. The <code>ON *.*</code> syntax is a ClickHouse requirement for this privilege type and does not expand the scope of data access.
</div>

> If you are enabling **schema collection** (Agent 7.81+), add the following grants:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable **schema collection** (Agent 7.81+), add the following grants:
```

| `collect_schemas.max_columns` | integer | `1000` | Maximum number of columns to collect per table or view. |
| `collect_schemas.include_databases` | list | - | Regex patterns for databases to include. If empty, all databases (except system databases) are included. |
| `collect_schemas.exclude_databases` | list | - | Regex patterns for databases to exclude. System databases (`system`, `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`, `information_schema`) are always excluded. |
| `collect_schemas.include_tables` | list | - | Regex patterns for tables to include. If empty, all tables are included. |
| `collect_schemas.exclude_tables` | list | - | Regex patterns for tables to exclude. |

### Schema metrics (Agent 7.81+)

Emits per-table size gauges and per-view refresh status gauges. Independent of `collect_schemas` — enable this without Schema Explorer to track table sizes on dashboards.

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `schema_metrics.enabled` | boolean | `false` | Enable per-table size and per-view refresh gauges. Requires `dbm: true`. |
| `schema_metrics.collection_interval` | number | `60` | Collection interval in seconds. |

> ## Coming soon
> 
> <div class="alert alert-info">
> <strong>Async insert observability</strong> — visibility into ClickHouse async insert buffers and flush history from <code>system.asynchronous_inserts</code> and <code>system.asynchronous_insert_log</code> is planned for a future Agent release. This will surface per-table buffer sizes, flush rates, and error rates as DBM metrics.
> </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| `collect_schemas.max_columns` | integer | `1000` | Maximum number of columns to collect per table or view. |
| `collect_schemas.include_databases` | list | - | Regex patterns for databases to include. If empty, all databases (except system databases) are included. |
| `collect_schemas.exclude_databases` | list | - | Regex patterns for databases to exclude. System databases (`system`, `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`, `information_schema`) are always excluded. |
| `collect_schemas.include_tables` | list | - | Regex patterns for tables to include. If empty, all tables are included. |
| `collect_schemas.exclude_tables` | list | - | Regex patterns for tables to exclude. |

### Schema metrics (Agent 7.81+)

Emits per-table size gauges and per-view refresh status gauges. Independent of `collect_schemas` — enable this without Schema Explorer to track table sizes on dashboards.

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `schema_metrics.enabled` | boolean | `false` | Enable per-table size and per-view refresh gauges. Requires `dbm: true`. |
| `schema_metrics.collection_interval` | number | `60` | Collection interval in seconds. |

> ## Coming soon

Reviewer: Remove this heading and the `<div class="alert alert-info">` block that follows — forward-looking placeholder content gets stale once the feature ships.
